Oh wait, you're listening.
You are listening to radio lab radio from W N Y S C
three two one. Hey, I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich.
This is radio Lauder for today. Do, do, do, do. Yeah.
We're going to begin with a conversation we had actually quite awhile ago.
I would benefit from a little bit of framing about kind of what we're like our
goal of this session. Sure. We can frame it, uh,
can make you blab a lot and then we edit it later. Right. That's kind of it.
It's a conversation that we had with a reporter.
I see someone we used to work with. Yeah. X intern. Yeah.
One of our great interns has gone off in the world. Amy O'Leary is her name.
Amy O'Leary is her name. Uh, she at the time was a New York Times reporter,
but he's now the editorial director of upworthy.
Um, so this started actually, uh, through a personal interest.
So I was in a relationship with an alcoholic and um, was very open about that,
talked about it with all my friends and we opened with him about it too. Yeah.
I mean, I would say he was in some denial and, but yeah, it was,
I mean I regularly would tell him, hey,
like you have a problem with this and you know,
and he would be clear back and say, you know,
if you're gonna make me choose between me and vodka, I'm gonna Choose Vodka.
So you would say that. And you're lucky to say that once. Yeah. Wow. And I was,
you know, young, but every night after 11 o'clock, my life became,
without getting into a lot of detail, there were fights, arguments,
a lot of rage and I didn't know what to do and felt really out of control.
And you know,
I had been to Allen on meetings and just seemed like this like terrible,
tragic problem that like a really smart,
cool person would turn really awful on you.
But then one day Amy found yourself in Barnes and noble on Union Square,
Union Square. Think I'm on the third floor.
And there was a table of mostly self help books.
And there was this one called the end of my addiction.
She picked it up. This book was super fascinating.
It was the memoir of a French cardiologist,
this French doctor who had had his life completely ruined by alcoholism and I
looked at it and I f I probably stood there like feet glued to the floor and
just like read 70% of the book.
[inaudible]
the book described in very vivid detail,
this successful doctor just sliding off the rails. He'd been in, you know,
detoxes and medical treatment facilities, you know,
upwards of a half dozen times. His practice had fallen off.
He was losing everything in his life.
At one point he describes this terrifying moment of waking up in the back of a
taxi. Blood all over himself does know whose blood it is,
does know where he's going. He was totally desperate.
He killing himself was the next option.
And then at one point he says that he had read this tiny nugget, New York Times,
and this is like the early nineties I think, barely.
He'd stumbled across this short piece about a guy who had been addicted to
cocaine taking some muscle relaxes and his cravings for cocaine completely
ceased. It was just one guy, one guy's experience,
but he saw that and he basically just felt like, well I might as well try this.
I'm just going to experiment on myself.
So he gets the drug starts taking it and he slowly like doses up,
uh,
more and more amounts of the drug. Nothing happens, nothing happens.
And then at one point he says
the switch flipped
[inaudible]
and once the switch hit you just became absolutely indifferent to alcohol. Boom.
Yup.
Apparently this obsessive need for alcohol that had burdened him his entire life
just went away. Total indifference. What is the drug called, by the way?
Baclofen. P. A. C. L. O. F. E. N. Baclofen.
Amy says at this point, standing there in the Barnes and Nobel,
she was interested, skeptical but interested. Yeah. So I,
I've found an email address with like you do as a reporter.
I googled every combination of his name til I found some little dot,
fr email address and emailed him and he, you know,
he wrote back right away and they set up a time to talk. You know, I'm already,
we have it planned in advance. I confirm it with them.
I'm all set up at my desk in New York and he picked up and I was like,
you and Dr Emison and how are you? It's so good to speak with you.
And he iMusic Amy, Amy, I'm so sorry. I'm rescuing my girlfriend.
We are in the Alps. I'm carrying her down a mountain side. Can I call you back?
Did you hear wind in the background and, and the sound of a,
I heard no sound effects. No, no. But he,
he did seem like he was exerting themselves to some, some extent. So, you know,
we schedule a second appointment
and
um, you know, I've recorded the phone call.
Hello? Hello. Is this Dr Emison? Yes. Is Amy? Yes. Amy. And like, hi Ed.
Nice to talk to you. And then like miracles happened either way.
The last time we spoke I was, I was rescuing my girlfriend like God,
it was like a hit sprayed it, it doesn't make me a,
we were in Switzerland in that 10,000 feet.
So he launches into the mountain story and then
wrong. And this kind of goes off. Yeah.
When Moses opened direct,
see people paid for the miracle [inaudible] fame like me to become who you are
and I am who I am. When did Einstein might have been wrong and
the Einstein was right and I mean to do the whole Rubinstein told me he's never
heard of can expect me. He's her ground man. He knows her.
I'll wait for tico data if comes to new bet. You never know.
People tell me you may have made the discovery of inquiry.
I mean there was no way
he like literally went on for 20 minutes before I got in.
I wanted to ask you with a little question.
You know I read your book I think close to when it first came out in the United
States.
Oh really? Yeah. It's really makes a thriller. I mean it's fun.
I mean then he was off again instead of times read it cause [inaudible] went to
Seattle and I see that. Did that not happen?
But I mean if you look in the back you don't [inaudible]
then like literally it was 20 minutes of how important our shared was to like
save the world.
You see red flags going off left and right.
And I sort of started to downshift my thought of doing a story.
And right about this time my reporting group got disbanded,
do it and do to an internal reorganization.
And so I moved to a different desk and it was just like, okay,
maybe somebody radio lab will be interested in cause we'll eat anything.
No. In all fairness, Dr. Mason who unfortunately passed away a few years ago,
uh, may have been in the middle of a manic episode,
which doesn't necessarily negate his, to the story he was telling him. No, no,
no. And uh, even after dropping the story, Amy as,
as a journalist and as someone who had been personally affected by alcoholism,
I was incredibly torn.
As a journalist you have to be skeptical of everything,
but at the same time,
like wouldn't it be great if we lived in a world where you could
[inaudible]
deal with this problem, which, you know, tears apart.
So many lives kill so many people,
creates all kinds of pain and agony with like a medication that just seems
great. Yeah.
[inaudible]
and like the question for me is like,
we often see addiction as like this thing that you've got a morally conquer,
like a spiritual calamity that you've got to somehow reorganize your entire
being in order to get through. But what if it's not that way?
What if it's,
what if it's simply a switch in your brain that got stuck in the on position and
you can use a pill to just switch it right off. Oh, be nice.
Now we were super skeptical of this idea,
but we also couldn't stop thinking about it. Yeah,
so recently we started making some calls. Hi, it's Anna Rose Childress.
I'm all here.
Dr. Anna Rose Childress is an addiction researcher at the University of
Pennsylvania and Amy pointed us to her because it was her work that actually
inspired Dr. Mason. I don't know if you mentioned throbbing,
pulsing desire states, but somehow that comes to mind.
So that's their specialty, throbbing,
pulsing desire states and that sounds great.
She spoke with a producer,
Andy Mills and I in the studio and for decades she has been studying that
craving state and addiction. She's interviewed people about it,
but what patients described to me is that they would sometimes describe as sort
of a wave of sensation,
some enormous wave just pulsates throughout your whole body.
Go from their toes, up to their head and back down. Yeah.
My toes to my head, to my toes, to my head, my zoom,
a zoom room, rushing, pulsating.
Okay. One day in 1995 she's at a conference,
she bumps into a guy who tells her he has managed to get some rats addicted to
cocaine, give them Baclofen, and they totally lost interest in the coke.
They were disinterested for several hours. So I saw this and I thought, wow.
So she began to give back often to people who were addicted to crack small
doses. And initially there was a lot of disappointment. Results weren't great.
Then she says, one day she was sitting in the staff lounge, just chilling,
and a colleague granted and said, you know, there's this,
this guy over at the hospital next door, and you know, Anna was,
you've got to talk to him. So when the desire,
his name was Ed Coleman is a paraplegic. He had had a drug deal gone wrong,
been shot in the neck, paralyzed from the waist down.
So he was in a wheelchair taking baclofen.
I was having more bed space
because he was having these spasms in his legs and he recounted this to me and I
actually have the tape of it.
Low dose at first and that was 10 milligrams four times a day.
And then you upped the dose. Tell me why you upped the dose,
the dose,
because from that 10 10 dose was a tear in the muscle spasm
was to just tidy up shame. So I said,
well maybe if I take two [inaudible] with them.
When did you notice
what Edward found was that when he doubled his baclofen dose,
I would try to use cocaine
and facts that really cool.
King no longer had the high
when I was taking it, I didn't have any cravings.
No,
he then went on to tell her that when he stopped taking baclofen cause he did
stop for two days.
I was having bad spasms. The leg spasms came back,
but I was getting the full effect.
They could get the high again and the craving went through the ceiling.
Ooh.
So Edward had been doing his own experiments. He had doubled the dose.
He had have the dose to see what was the dose where he could still feel the
cocaine high, but his spasms wouldn't be driving him crazy. Wow.
So he was like a one man study. Yeah, no.
This was actually the specific story that inspired Dr. Mason to do his one man
study and to write that book,
which held Amy glued to the floor in Barnes and noble. Now,
even though none of this was rock solid science by any means,
Amy says that since then,
those people have begun to quietly take this drug in some doctors if you're
going to prescribe it. You know,
I talked to a guy who runs a halfway house in Youngstown, Ohio,
who is using Baclofen with people that were under his care and there was a
doctor in Chicago who was prescribing it to a lot of people that this is all off
label use. Yeah, yeah, absolutely. She still does it.
After Mason's book message boards popped up,
hundreds of people on these boards swapping stories about how much they took
when they took it. They were crowdsourcing their own cure in effect.
But the really surprising thing is it, as we kept calling around,
we realized that Baclofen was just the tip of the iceberg.
Yes, yes. Well, there's another drug, uh, a camper Seder, Camp Hall,
and this other drug Gabba Pinton. There's to pyramid or Topamax, a dice cell.
Fran Chantix, suboxone, naltrexone, buprenorphine.
This is doctor Mark Willan brain.
I'm an addiction psychiatrist here in Saint Paul, Minnesota.
Mike says that some of these drugs try to target the craving trend,
blocked the craving.
Others tried to target the high that you get. The simple way to put it as this,
it's a buzzkill. It's a buzzkill. Interesting. So you drink,
but you don't get the, you don't get the happy warm feeling.
[inaudible]
apparently it takes all the fun out of it.
According to one journalist that we talked to, Gabrielle Glazer,
who does a ton of reporting about mental health and addiction tech,
my six 30 pill.
She tried one of these drugs during the course of reporting and honestly it made
a second glass of wine seem about as enjoyable as a big glass of Dimetapp.
Why didn't you really, it was, it was just, it was like drinking water. The why.
What is the drug supposedly doing? Well,
it blocks opioid receptors in the brain, which is our pleasure system.
According to Dr Dr. Wilson Brain. What basically, if you think of like,
if you think of a good buzz as a initially as like a chemical handshake,
like you've got the alcohol molecules and they need to click in with the
receptors in your brain and that's what creates ultimately the good feeling,
right? What these, what this category of drugs do is they,
they get in the middle of the handshake,
they sort of like a blanket prevent the hands from shaking or muffled them sort
of. Right. And if you're not getting as much enjoyment out of the drinks,
then the idea is you're not going to drink as much and these are home run drugs
that you didn't do use are drugs that you just don't see these kinds of effects.
Uh, in medicine in hardly anything.
Mark pointed us to some studies that have been done in Finland, the Netherlands,
the UK, Iran,
a bunch that have been done in the u s they look at this one particular drug
called Naltrexone and show that it has a very high success rate.
Like one particular study in Finland with about 150 people showed that this drug
had a 78% success rate in helping very heavy drinkers reduce their drinking to
normal levels. Right, right.
So are these drugs being used? No. No.
Basically the pickup has been near zero.
This is something that we heard over and over again.
These drugs are out there that there's, there is some evidence that they work,
but they're kind of invisible. Yes, exactly. That's real glazer.
Again here,
about 1% of people who suffer from alcohol use disorder are ever given the
choice or an option to take any sort of medication. She has been maybe one,
2% at best. Yes. Which is particularly weird. She says,
because that drug now tracks on that was using the finished study that did well,
it's been out for a while.
This drug was approved by the FDA in 1994 and by the core purpose of treating
alcoholics. Wow. Wow. We never heard about it. That's so weird.
Why wouldn't we've heard of that? Well, that's a very complicated question.
Should, it's sorta hard to pin down,
but there has basically just been this psychic barrier that we've all had to
seeing addiction as something a pill can help. I mean, just look at Med schools.
I think there are something around 140
medical schools in the United States and only 14 medical schools.
Was there a single course in addiction medicine.
That number has since gone up a little bit, but not a lot.
And so we asked her why would that be? And she said, well,
it's just the addiction treatment has never really been part of the rest of
medicine. It has been completely segregated.
It's been its own self contained world.
And this actually goes back to how it was set up at the very beginning.
And this I found fascinating. If you go back about 80 years,
we had in hospitals at the time in the late 1930s and early 1940s we had but
white plague, tuberculosis, TB words.
But then suddenly after World War II, t TB, how to cure,
you got better.
You didn't have to stay in the hospital in the sanitarium just took recover and
suddenly these TB units were empty.
And she says it was just a few years earlier that a group of mostly men had
gotten together to form alcoholics anonymous.
[inaudible]
no, at the time doctors had no idea what to do with alcohol addicted people.
They were called drunkards in me. Brit was another word that was commonly used.
They are basically seen as hopeless cases.
And of course the founders of AA knew this.
So when they saw all those MTTB wards,
they went to the hospitals and said,
let's make those alcoholism units in your hospital.
Really? Yes. Doctors fought. Okay, we don't have an answer for these guys,
so we'll just let them, we'll let them do it.
And thus began 80 years of separation.
And that's where we are now. Out of this physical separation, according Gab,
Gabrielle Glazer, you got a cultural separation,
two very different ways of seeing addiction. Cultural. All right,
what does that mean? Just to state it in the extremes.
On one hand you've got like someone in the medical sciences who might be
inclined to see addiction as a purely biological phenomenon. You know,
that's all this is and we'll just fix it. We'll just fix it. On the other hand,
you have other, the idea that there is no,
that you can't just fix this biologically. There's something deeply wrong here.
There's something in the person, in the spirit,
in the soul is a reflection of your inner broken self. Yeah.
Which just has to be addressed at a higher level
in the AA curriculum. Um,
I may have my facts wrong. I believe five out of the 12 steps mentioned,
God actually when we checked, it's six out of the 12th half. And the big book,
which is the Bible of, of alcoholics anonymous,
there's a mention of God or him or your higher power on almost every page.
What is the recovery rate from the AA crap. Well,
what many researchers say is that the success rate of AA is in the single
digits.
One study show that for every 100 people who show up in an AA meeting on January
1st,
only five of those people will be sitting there on December 31st of the same
year in that same year.
Really? So then, yeah, so the, what you call that the dropout rate is,
is 95%. Yeah. I was really surprised to find that out.
Now to be fair. Hmm. I think we should be fair. We have to say that. Um,
a couple things like first of all, a is a, is a volunteer organization.
It's a support group, doesn't claim to be a treatment.
And also when you start talking about success rates, uh,
that gets really squishy. I mean, if a person doesn't show up today a beating,
it doesn't necessarily mean that they're drinking. Again,
they may be doing just fine or perhaps they have switched groups. They've moved.
Exactly. So it's really, really hard to sort of define your terms here.
Clearly a is important to a lot of people and that's something that actually
Gabrielle Glazer found out last spring when she published an article in the
Atlantic where she basically laid all this out. When that article came out,
I received thousands of emails. You are a horrible person.
You deserve to die. A saved my life.
I hope your kids get killed by drunk drivers.
But so there was this article in the Atlantic and April when we talked to Dr
Willing brain who a glazer mentioned in the article is somebody who believes
more in medication than 12 step. He said that when that article came out,
since then, our phone is ringing off the hook.
We got about half of our calls from out of state.
Is there anybody in North Carolina or in New York or in Texas or in California
or wherever it is, and they're desperate.
And the families are desperate for an alternative and they can't find one.
He says all of this makes him think back about 30 years. When I was a resident,
there was this debate raging. Um, there was this big debate about depression,
whether people should be treated with antidepressants,
but he says the debate completely shifted and we go,
it comes to Prozac. When we got Prozac,
doctors have prescribed Prozac to 2 million Americans.
Suddenly you had this drug that was a massive success,
spawned other drugs and in the process changed how people fundamentally see
depression.
And now most people, you know,
get treatment for anxiety or depression with antidepressants compared to
psychotherapy. Do you think we're heading in the same place with addiction? Oh,
we are. Oh, we are. We are. There's no question.
I do predict in 10 or 15 years we'll have a Prozac moment.
Okay.
This is Jean Pelletier in Boston, Massachusetts.
Radiolab is supported in part by the Alfred piece phone foundation,
enhancing public understanding of science and technology in the modern world.
More information aboutSloan@wwwdotsloan.org
hey everyone. I'm Dr Raj.
I love getting to talk with you on my show every single day.
But when the cameras stopped rolling, the conversation isn't over for,
I decided to start a podcast in order to dive deeper into the issues and ideas
that I love sharing with you. It's health unfiltered.
My wife Lisa will be joining me and together we're taking wellness to the next
level and having a little fun along the way. So download the Dr Oz podcast.
Subscribe wherever you get your podcasts.
[inaudible]
all right, welcome back. I'm Jad Robert, and if you know this music,
you already know it's the Brian Lehrer show on Wny C. Good morning everyone.
This is the Brian Lehrer show at our own home station. Wny C in New York.
Very, very popular show. Yes. And A to explain,
we wanted a gut check cause we'd been hearing all of these, uh,
things from experts saying that we're undergoing a sea change and a,
we're going to know is that actually happening out there in the world and the
world, at least our local world is full of Brian Lehrer listeners.
It's your stories of what kinds of treatment you were offered and actually used
for alcohol and substance abuse.
So we asked the Brian Layer team if they would help us out,
call us at two one two, four, three,
three and they helped us out big toe and we'll explain more now with Radiolab.
Hosts get up a broad hijack. Hey Brian, thank you for having me on.
And you believe we're in the midst of a cultural and medicinal shift for the way
we both view and treat people with addictions, right? Yeah.
So I mean we were not sure to be totally honest. You know,
we bumped into a reporter a couple of years ago who told us the story of a guy.
So I sorta summarized a Amy O'Leary story about Dr. Mason.
He described a moment where the addiction just switched off.
Then I sort of summarize what the experts have told us.
It may be something is happening, but we weren't sure. We're just not sure.
And so I, we're curious to hear from people who struggled with substance abuse.
So I'm wondering what sorts of treatments they've been offered.
If they have they seen pills like naltrexone or baclofen. Have they used them?
Have they worked?
What's been the experience so listeners and just like that help Chad report this
story.
Hi. Hi.
Well, my name is Nicole. I'm calling from New Hampshire. Oh,
actually in Afghanistan I've overdosed many times on heroin, cocaine,
so agree to year of sobriety. X month
there was an explosion of calls, ginger and Mayo Pack. You're on w NYC.
Hi, how are you?
I'm an alcoholic and an addict and I've been in recovery for 18 years.
Sitting outside of an AA meeting for thanks to this,
we hear from a lot of people who felt like this idea of a pill that can treat
addiction was idiotic.
I just don't see psychotropics, vision, really a solution.
There is no quick fix. There is no magical medication.
If it was just the physical disease, they would all be cured,
but we also heard from a lot of people who had just been offered these drugs.
I was prescribed Campbell.
I have been offering a proxy soon and I'll turn it on and it is very effective.
It does help cut the craving.
One guy who called or just so incredibly crazy that I heard the show for me as
I'm about to embark upon this,
he just got prescribed addiction medicine that morning.
One way or another I'm going to fix this.
He was excited as we are a lot of the colors in this category because
if the shoes,
if these pills worked for them, it kind of means that they're just sick.
They're not bad people.
Well, it's not something that people choose even though it seems that way
tomorrow in Manhattan. You're on Gabby land, Rice. Say hello tomorrow.
Hi. Yeah. Um,
one caller called in to say that, uh,
her dad had had a terrible time with alcohol. It was destroying the family
and you know, we were thinking about putting him in rehab or something,
but afraid of the stigma of it. And my mom is a doctor,
so she was working in the hospital.
She told me that one day if she took matters into her own hands and she gave him
injection shots of um, something called Voltaren or you know,
the way we say it is like [inaudible]
it's actually turns out to be a muscle relaxing,
not too dissimilar from baclofen
and it's work one day. Like everything was okay and he was over it.
I mean it wasn't something that was controlling our life anymore.
Well let me ask you this. Um, cause I, that's producer. Any males, again,
after the Brian Lehrer show,
we had so many calls that he set up a Google voicemail and he talked with an
additional 40 or so people and he asked everyone,
do you feel that we're headed toward a sea change where we're going to start
treating addictions in a new way?
No, I completely do. You know, you've got a drug problem.
Find the drug that fixes the drug problem.
There's no pills that will make you want to put down the drink and the truck.
[inaudible]
hello Billy. Hey, will you just introduce yourself? Tell me who you are. Yeah,
and you can use my, you can use my full name if you want. My name is Billy Webb.
I am from Shaker Heights, Ohio and I currently live in Saint Paul, Minnesota.
Hey, this is Andy. So, uh, in talking to all those people on the phone Billie's,
it was the story that I just kept thinking about over and over again.
And so eventually we ended up getting him into the studio.
Do you remember what it was like the first time that you had alcohol?
Yeah,
it was the summer that I turned 16 and I was a quieter kid and I was kind of a
nerd. You might say I was into computer games,
but then it's the tide sort of swung and I got into music and most specifically
punk rock and sky.
He says it was this time that he was coming out of his shell.
He learned how to play the bass, started practicing all the time.
I made these new friends and they started a band and we were horrible,
but we were willing to put ourselves out there and we started playing gigs and I
had gotten my first girlfriend at that time and I was very excited and nervous
to see her. So I figured, why not?
Why not loosen myself up a little bit?
So one day he breaks into his father's liquor cabinet,
takes a couple shots of mountain gay rum. It was euphoric,
to be honest with you. And I finally felt like I was myself. Huh.
And it just felt like I was on top of the world and I could do anything.
And I had all these creative ideas that came to me.
I wanted to talk to people that sort of, when things started to take off,
by the time Billy was 24 Bios, becoming an entrepreneur,
he was running his own business.
It was a storage facility that he planned to convert into art spaces where we
would have shows and maybe even a little small record shop.
I was in a relationship, we had a dog, he was a new band that toured.
It was fun. I can say that for sure.
I could even conduct business out of the bar down the street if I wanted to
cause the business line forwarded to my cell,
but he said that it was also around this time that he started to wake up in the
morning with the shakes and I remember drinking beer in the morning in the
bathroom. How much do you think you were drinking at this point?
20 drinks a day. 25 sometimes. Wow. And usually the night before,
before I passed out or went to sleep, I would say, you know,
I'm going to turn it around in the morning. I'm going to,
I'm going to get out of bed and work out, eat a full meal.
And that never ended up happening.
What eventually did end up happening is that Philly asked for help,
both his mom and his sister,
they flew Billy up to Minnesota where he checked into one of the best rehab
centers in the Midwest and when I got there,
it looks like a small college campus. I mean it's very serene,
sort of peaceful setting, very welcoming. He started going to group meetings,
started working out and was like, alright, I, I was actually excited.
I thought that things would turn around when I got back.
But within just a day of being back in Cleveland,
it was right back to where I was 20 drinks a day, 25 sometimes.
So I ended up back in treatment. We figured, you know,
I just didn't do it right the first time. So if we go back,
we'll get it right this time. And once again, you know,
I crashed and burned this time. Not even in Cleveland.
I had relapsed at the airport. I didn't even make it to Cleveland and he said,
this is just how things went for years.
It was just the same old story of in and out, in and out.
In the span of about four years time,
Billy tried seven different treatment centers and detox centers.
Lots of AA meetings. I went to 110 meetings in 70 days.
I went to 28 and one week, one time nothing worked.
He says that his AA sponsors would tell him, you know, you can do this.
She'll get it right. So we'd leave those meetings feeling positive,
end up at the liquor store.
I just considered myself a failure at this point in time that I was never going
to get better and that led to more and more drinking.
He said that he lost his girlfriend pretty much all his friends got fired from
his job due to drinking.
And my day is just consisted of walking to the liquor store,
buying two fifths and walking home. That's all I did.
I just laid in bed and and drank.
It's hard to even think about without being completely horrified that that's
what my life had turned into.
And then I woke up one day with severe,
severe pain in my abdomen and I couldn't move or walk or keep water down and was
really scary and it was pancreatitis.
So I ended up checking myself into a hospital in grand rapids and I saw these
people and they said, wow, we don't even,
we don't see this condition until people are usually in their mid forties Billy
was only 29 years old when I got out.
I moved into a sober house in Saint Paul and that's when I got hooked up with
the alterior clinic?
No, at the Altair Clinic, which I should say really quick is run by Dr Mark.
Then bring who we talked to earlier,
a there they do something that they call evidence based treatment,
so if a patient shows up looking for help,
they are given a therapist to treat any underlying mental health conditions that
they may have and for everything connected to their addiction.
They're given medications and Billy's case, they gave them naltrexone.
When I took the Naltrexone, I actually was able to limit my drinking too,
two to six drinks a night,
which was quite frankly felt like a normal amount to me.
He was able to drink moderately? Yeah, almost overnight I was blown away.
That's all I wanted was to be like everyone else who can write,
have a couple drinks and set it down. Well what does that tell you though?
That tells you that you are
okay.
Cured. I just felt like there was,
there was no compulsion to keep going and going. Like what? What was,
what was different though? Like did it, did it not taste as good?
It tasted as good. I can say that for sure,
especially if it was a micro brew or something like that, but
okay.
I didn't get that same brush in my head and being able to drink without that
rush for awhile. That made all the difference. For a couple months I was, okay,
you know, now I can just have a couple,
but what happened was I
was taking it and then on one weekend I just decided, you know what?
You know what? I'm not going to take it this weekend. It's a long weekend.
I don't need it. Billy says that even though the urge to drink,
which was something that had been nagging at him for years,
even though that was now gone,
he told me that there was just some part of him that missed being drunk.
I wanted to be to be intoxicated.
Even with this medication that was helping you, you missed it.
Yeah. Knowing all that it costs you. What about it did you miss?
I missed feeling like myself.
Okay.
I didn't, I, I didn't. Hey guys, this is Corey. The engineer,
I hate to interrupt, but we have to the studios,
it is being booked in like the next 10 minutes of sorry guys.
So with poetically bad timing, um,
we got kicked out of the studio. Um, and this was,
this was several months back actually
and it took about another month and a half before we could all get back in the
studio again. Villi. Hey, well I uh, yeah I do. I,
so I started by asking him, so when you said that you didn't feel like yourself,
what, what did that mean? I didn't picture life being possible without alcohol.
That's the only person that I knew.
And basically what he told me is that if you think back to the beginning of the
story, he came out of his shell alongside alcohol being creative,
writing music, performing music alcohols there.
His first girlfriend alcohol was there.
He's had drinking associated since puberty with the best parts of himself.
And so like,
you know how we all have this sense of like who we are inside of us. Like,
you know I have like you have Vic,
your inner Jed where like people can think what they want about you and you've
got your reputation but like you, you've know who you are down deep.
Well his, it was all wrapped up in alcohol so you take that alcohol away.
What was left was an empty guy that I didn't know,
just this void and filling up that void.
He says was this like on slot of these terrible memories,
sequestered detox words and punitive treatment and all the people I've alienated
over the years,
all the lost opportunities and all the failed attempts.
He says that's what he would think about when he was sober and he just wanted
not to. Last time we talked to Billy, he was doing really well.
I had the job, I had the girl, I had a band back,
but he says that in the course of just this month and a half since the last time
that we talked last, the girl isolated a bunch of friends and lost it.
Good job that I wanted to keep for awhile until I could get into Grad school.
So kind of having to start over now.
Even just listening to your voice right now. You, you, you sound so different.
I know that I sound different because I was,
I was coming in here with more of a positive spirit last time. Um,
I really was flying high last time.
People were excited for me to come in and now they're, they said,
are you sure you sure you want to come in today and talk to them? I mean, the,
the people who even talk to me right now, um,
so it's hard to do a triple back flip. You know, I tried to,
I didn't want to come in here crying or anything, but you know,
uh, it's pretty sad. It's pretty sad. But at the same time, you know,
I feel hopeful that I can beat this.
[inaudible]
not really. Still seeing a therapist, he's still going out here.
He's actually on this new medication now called Gabba Piton of which she says
has been helpful.
And I know I was pretty staunchly against the 12 steps last time,
but I am actually going back to meetings these days.
[inaudible]
just to be with people who are in the same boat.
So who's doing both? Yeah. Huh.
I hear a story like that and I think, yeah, I think
we're ready to see addiction in a new way and we're definitely,
I think pills will be a big part of that. Seems to me.
But the pills can't get all the way down, you know? Right.
The dark, the thing that makes the addiction go is really deep.
And like this reminds me of, of when we were talking to Nora Volkow
fine. I'm director of the National Institute of Drug Abuse at the NIH.
She sort of pointed out this same idea in a really interesting way.
One of the questions that I've always got in my brain is, um,
why do we become addicted? I mean,
why is it that we can fall into a state where we actually become obsessed about
something and compulsive? Um,
despite the fact that it can have negative consequences and romantic love is
exactly that situation. Norris is a,
one thing that biologists know and actually have known for a while,
is that drugs hijack systems in our brain that are there for other purposes.
She says literally drugs will light up the same circuits in your brain that are
usually engaged. Like when you're in love,
when you're hanging out with your friends,
when you know you're being hugged by your kid,
since it's almost like randomness of chemistry that you have these chemical
compounds that can go directly and activate these,
these centers.
So it hijacks the very things that make us, you know,
good friends and good parents. Correct.
So it's like a weakness born of a strength in a way.
Yeah. And actually, um, according to Andrew's children's,
so we had talked to earlier people with addictions,
ironically they are the fittest of the fit in evolutionary terms right there.
The people who would have been earliest for the,
the food earliest for the sexual partner.
The idea here is that deep down inside of them,
like we're talking about a genetic level, they have the greatest sensitivity.
They would be exquisitely attuned to the promise of rewards.
And most of the time, and for most of the Millennia,
all the priorities were on being good reward appreciators that that was our only
job.
But now we're in a different environment where we've got huge opportunities for
many sexual encounters that carry lethal viruses rather than just, you know,
the possibility of survival of the fittest. And we've got, you know, uh,
calorie dense meals that we can acquire without expanding a calorie and see,
and almost every circumstance that you can think of except for the last,
you know,
50 years being on the side of being overly responsive to reward was probably
mostly an advantage. You know,
that's so interesting. I've never heard it said that way.
And for our patients in some sense,
they're the fittest of the fit and being punished for it.
Yeah, it's like a terrible well
joke
and the terrible reality of that joke is something that just kept showing up on
our voicemail over and
over again.
Hello? Yes, this is pat reus.
I was listening to the Brian Lehrer show 'em the way home from work today. And,
uh, I have a son who died of heroin addiction,
alcohol abuse last May.
And since then I've been trying to come to terms with it.
This is my son. He was a great person.
I think he just couldn't see
how to be sober in this world that he knew that was really hard for him.
How do you live your life when you have to be sober?
[inaudible] [inaudible]
the story was reported and produced by a Mr Andy Mills.
Special thanks to Tim Howard and two of your Mitra, Leanne Donagen,
Deborah Snyder, John Kelly, George Qube, and this is Andy.
And I wanted to say to the dozens and dozens of people who were willing to talk
to me, some of them for hours about the recovery. Thank you very much.
And,
and a very special thanks to Brian Lehrer and Megan Ryan and that whole team.
And of course to Amy O'Leary who started the whole thing off. Exactly.
I'm Jad Abumrad I'm Robert Krulwich. Thank you guys for listening.
To replay this message, press two. Hi, this is Billy web.
Radiolab is produced by Jad Habram Rad. Our staff includes Brenna sterile.
David cable, Dylan Keith, Matt,
tightly Robert Brawl with Andy Mills late this nature.
Kelsey pageant, Varian whack, Molly Webster,
Jordan Wheeler, and Jamie York with help from Simon Adler,
Alexander Lee, young Abigail seal,
definitely Pam and Michael Lowinger.
Our fact checkers are the Dasher and the gel hair. End of mailbox.